#The QIES Methodology
While we all have assumptions, we want the premise of these projects to be to throw all assumptions out the window.  In many cases, our assumptions are correct, but when we assume, we sometimes blind ourselves to alternate possibilities.  So, contrary to the scientific method, which is geared towards experiment design, we do not want to have hypotheses.  Hypotheses suggest a yes or no and can skew how questions are asked.  In most projects, the data has already been gathered, so the experiment can be performed in a more exploratory fashion.  The QIES methodology is deliberately high level in order to encourage freedom and innovation in how investigators interact with data.
##Question
Sometimes the ideas and assumptions most important to our world views are the ones we should question the most.  Questioning does not necessarily mean doubting, but it does mean that we cannot simply say that because it was once true, it is also true now.  The world and the data it produces are constantly changing, and this flow and flux of data gives us the opportunity to reinvestigate with the potential for new results.
##Investigate
Before we look forward, we should always look back to see what came before.  Understanding the context of a problem is important.  We do not have to use what came before, but it should be a piece of information when approaching a problem.  Once we understand what came before, we can start upon the task at hand.
In any crime television show, the most difficult part of most investigations is finding out who knows something about what happened.  Similarly, in any investigation, getting the right data can be the toughest task.  Does the data I need exist?  Where can I find it?  Is there anything I should know about how it was acquired before I use it?  Is it trustworthy?  Did the collector have bias?  Is it in a format I understand and can use?  Has anyone else asked these questions before and did they share their findings?  You can always think about making your own data, by polling your school or community!  Be sure to read up on how to create a good sample set though!
Then we have to use the data.  Exploratory analysis often calls for finding ways to quickly characterize and summarize data so that we can get a good idea of what is there before we try to do more intense analysis.  It also helps with quality control.  
##Evaluate
What does this data mean?  Once we have data and understand it enough to know the possibilities of how to use it, we need to get down into the data and derive meaning from it.  How can this data help me drive solutions?  Part of evaluation is also acknowledging what might be missing.  Missing data can limit the scope and impact of your analysis.  We encourage students to use quantitative techniques in order to evaluate their data.  Doing things as simple as finding a line of best fit or a correlation factor can help us understand related elements of a problem.
##Share
Sharing is caring, as they say.  We oh so very much want people to SHARE what they find.  What good is knowledge if it is not passed on to other researchers and decision makers.  If you have had a EUREKA moment, tell others about it!  It is great to take your data and make a good visualization for it, whether that be a line chart or something a little more complex.  Mentors and peers can help you find good ways to represent and share your data.
